docs: FIPS 140-2 Compliance (#17668)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/enterprise/fips.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: FIPS 140-2
description: >-
  A version of Consul compliant with FIPS 140-2 is available to Enterprise users. Learn about where to find FIPS-compliant versions of Consul, as well as usage restrictions and technical details.
---

# FIPS 140-2

<Note> This feature requires Consul Enterprise. </Note>

Builds of Consul Enterprise marked with a `fips1402` feature name include built-in support for FIPS 140-2 compliance.

To use this feature, you must have an [active or trial license for Consul Enterprise](/consul/docs/enterprise/license/overview). To start a trial, contact HashiCorp sales.

## Using FIPS 140-2 Consul Enterprise

> FIPS 140-2 versions of Consul Enterprise behave like non-FIPS versions of Consul. No restrictions are placed on algorithms and it is up to the operator to ensure Consul remains in a FIPS-compliant mode of operation. Maintaining FIPS-compliant operation requires configuring some settings such as [ensuring TLS is enabled to require encrypted communication](consul/tutorials/security/tls-encryption-secure). Consul products surface some helpful warnings where settings are insecure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FIPS 140-2 builds of Consul Enterprise behave in the same way as non-FIPS builds. There are no restrictions on Consul algorithms and ensuring that Consul remains in a FIPS-compliant mode of operation is your responsibility. To maintain FIPS-compliant operation, you must [ensure that TLS is enabled](consul/tutorials/security/tls-encryption-secure) so that communication is encrypted. Consul products surface some helpful warnings where settings are insecure.
```

> Because Consul Enterprise’s default settings may transmit sensitive control plane information without encryption, it is especially important to ensure that all agents have gossip encryption and mTLS enabled when running Consul with FIPS-compliant settings. In addition, be aware that TLSv1.3 does not work with FIPS 140-2, as HKDF is not a certified primitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encryption is disabled in Consul Enterprise by default. As a result, Consul may transmit sensitive control plane information. You must ensure that gossip encryption and mTLS is enabled for all agents when running Consul with FIPS-compliant settings. In addition, be aware that TLSv1.3 does not work with FIPS 140-2, as HKDF is not a certified primitive.
```

> HashiCorp is limited to providing general guidance regarding using Consul Enterprise in a FIPS-compliant manner. We are not a NIST-certified testing laboratory and thus organizations may need to consult an approved auditor for further information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HashiCorp is not a NIST-certified testing laboratory and can only provide general guidance about using Consul Enterprise in a FIPS-compliant manner. We recommend consulting an approved auditor for further information.
```

The FIPS 140-2 variant of Consul uses separate binaries that are available available from the following sources:

> - From the [Hashicorp Releases page](https://releases.hashicorp.com/consul), releases ending with the `+ent.fips1402` suffix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- From the [HashiCorp Releases page](https://releases.hashicorp.com/consul), releases ending with the `+ent.fips1402` suffix.
```

- From the [Docker Hub `hashicorp/consul-enterprise-fips`](https://hub.docker.com/r/hashicorp/consul-enterprise-fips) container repository.
- From the [AWS ECR `hashicorp/consul-enterprise-fips`](https://gallery.ecr.aws/hashicorp/consul-enterprise-fips) container repository.
- From the [Red Hat Access `hashicorp/consul-enterprise-fips`](https://catalog.redhat.com/software/containers/hashicorp/consul-enterprise-fips/628d50e37ff70c66a88517ea) container repository.

> The above naming conventions, which append `.fips1402` to binary names and tags, and `-fips` to registry names, also apply to `consul-k8s`, `consul-dataplane`, and `consul-ecs`, which are packaged separately from Consul Enterprise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above naming conventions, which append `.fips1402` to binary names and tags, and `-fips` to registry names, also apply to `consul-k8s`, `consul-k8s-control-plane`, `consul-dataplane`, and `consul-ecs`, which are packaged separately from Consul Enterprise.
```
I've added a couple of components to the list. 

I think `packaged` is the best term in this context. Each one is a separate zip file on releases.hashicorp.com or a separate container image.

### Usage restrictions

When using Consul Enterprise with FIPS 140-2, be aware of the following operation restrictions:

#### Migration restrictions

> Hashicorp does not support in-place migrations from non-FIPS versions of Consul to FIPS versions of Consul, regardless of version. A fresh cluster installation is required to support FIPPS 140-2. It is not possible to upgrade directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do not support in-place migrations from non-FIPS builds of Consul to FIPS builds of Consul, regardless of version. A fresh cluster installation is required to support FIPS 140-2. You cannot upgrade directly to a FIPS-compliant build.
```
We should disambiguate between "build" and "version". Two builds of Consul (enterprise, OSS, FIPS) can be on the same version of Consul.

#### TLS restrictions
Consul Enterprise's FIPS modifications include restrictions to supported TLS cipher suites and key information. Only the following cipher suites are allowed:

- `TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256`
- `TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384`
- `TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256`
- `TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384`
- `TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256`
- `TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384`

In addition, only the following key types are allowed in TLS chains of trust:

- RSA 2048, 3072, and 4096-bit
- ECDSA P-256, P-384, and P-521

Finally, only TLSv1.2 is supported in FIPS mode. These settings are in line with recent NIST guidance and FIPS requirements.

#### Heterogeneous cluster deployments

> Hashicorp does not support mixed deployment scenarios within the same Consul cluster. An example of an unsupported deployment scenario is one that mixes FIPS and non-FIPS Consul binary versions. Nodes across the entire cluster must use a single binary or deployment type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do not support mixed deployment scenarios within the same Consul cluster. An example of an unsupported deployment scenario is one that mixes FIPS and non-FIPS Consul binaries. Nodes across the entire cluster must use a single binary or deployment type.
```

Running a heterogeneous cluster is not permitted by FIPS, as components of the system are not compliant with FIPS. Attempts to join non-FIPS and FIPS nodes or servers may fail.

### Envoy

> To enable users to deploy a FIPS compliant service mesh with Consul, HashiCorp provides FIPS compliant versions of Envoy available for download. Contact Hashicorp sales for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable users to deploy a FIPS compliant service mesh with Consul, HashiCorp provides FIPS compliant versions of Envoy available for download. Contact HashiCorp sales for more information.
```

## Deployment prerequisites

Depending on your Consul runtime, there are additional requirements for using FIPS 140-2.

### VMs

> If using Consul on VMs, you must use a FIPS compliant version of Envoy. Contact Hashicorp sales to learn how to obtain a FIPS compliant version of Envoy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using Consul on VMs, you must use a FIPS compliant version of Envoy. Contact HashiCorp sales to learn how to obtain a FIPS compliant version of Envoy.
```

### Consul-k8s and Helm

> When deploying the FIPS versions of Consul on Kubernetes using consul-k8s or Helm, you must ensure that the Helm chart is updated to use FIPS versions of Consul Enterprise, Consul Dataplane, and Envoy images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When deploying the FIPS builds of Consul on Kubernetes using `consul-k8s` or Helm, you must ensure that the Helm chart is updated to use FIPS builds of Consul Enterprise, Consul Dataplane, and Envoy images.
```

### ECS

[TODO]

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove it for now. We will need to update it later.

## Technical details

Consul's FIPS 140-2 Linux products use the BoringCrypto integration in the official Go 1.20+ toolchain, which include a FIPS-validated crypto module.

Consul's FIPS 140-2 products on Windows use the CNGCrypto integration in Microsoft's Go toolchain, which include a FIPS-validated crypto module.

> To ensure your version of Consul Enterprise includes FIPS support, confirm that a line with `FIPS: Enabled` appears when you run a version command. For example, the following message appears for Linux users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure your build of Consul Enterprise includes FIPS support, confirm that a line with `FIPS: Enabled` appears when you run a `version` command. For example, the following message appears for Linux users
```

- [BoringCrypto](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/certificate/4407)
- [CNG](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/certificate/4515)

### Validating FIPS crypto modules

To validate that a FIPS 140-2 Linux binary correctly includes BoringCrypto, run `go tool nm` on the binary to get a symbol dump.  On FIPS-enabled builds, many results appear, as in the following example:

```shell-session
$ go tool nm consul | grep -i goboringcrypto
 4014d0 T _cgo_6880f0fbb71e_Cfunc__goboringcrypto_AES_cbc_encrypt
 4014f0 T _cgo_6880f0fbb71e_Cfunc__goboringcrypto_AES_ctr128_encrypt
 401520 T _cgo_6880f0fbb71e_Cfunc__goboringcrypto_AES_decrypt
 401540 T _cgo_6880f0fbb71e_Cfunc__goboringcrypto_AES_encrypt
 401560 T _cgo_6880f0fbb71e_Cfunc__goboringcrypto_AES_set_decrypt_key
```

Similarly, on a FIPS Windows binary, run `go tool nm` on the binary to get a symbol dump, and then search for `go-crypto-winnative`. 

On both Linux and Windows non-FIPS builds, the search output yields no results.

> ### Leidos compliance
> 
> As of the release of Consul v1.16, a compliance letter from Leidos is available for FIPS Consul products using the Boring Crypto and Microsoft CNG libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Compliance Validation

A Lab, authorized by the U.S. Government to certify FIPS 140-2 compliance, is in the process of verifying that Consul Enterprise and it's related packages are compliant with the requirements of FIPS 140-2 Level 1.

```
